International migration1 is an integral part of the
development process in countries of origin, transit
and destination. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development includes several targets related directly to
international migration or migrants. The most explicit
among them is target 10.7, which calls on countries to
facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the
implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies. Other migration-related targets in the 2030
Agenda include strengthening and retaining the health
workforce in developing countries (target 3.c), providing scholarships for study abroad (target 4.b), respecting the
labour rights of migrant workers (target 8.8), reducing
the costs of transferring remittances (target 10.c), ending
human trafficking (targets 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2), establishing
legal identity, including through birth registration
(target 16.9) and disaggregating data by various characteristics, including migratory status (target 17.18).
In addition, international migration can facilitate the
achievement of other Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda,
including those related to eradicating poverty, facilitating
access to health care, education and decent work, and
promoting economic growth and gender equality. In 2021, migrants sent home $773 billion in remittances,
of which $605 billion to families in low-income or
middle-income countries. Remittances boost household
incomes and reduce poverty in countries and communities of origin. They can also help to increase school
enrollments, improve access to health care, boost
agricultural productivity, facilitate financial inclusion
and support business creation (Zlotnik, 2019; figure 1). Typically counter-cyclical in nature,2 remittances also
help to protect against economic shocks.
In addition, international migration can benefit places
of origin by promoting foreign direct investment from
diaspora communities, fostering the transfer of skills
and technology, and encouraging bilateral trade (Burns
and Mohapatra, 2008; Chowdhury, and others, 2022).
When it increases women’s bargaining power within
families, migration helps to promote gender equality
and the empowerment of women (Antman, 2015).
International migration, however, can also have negative impacts on achieving the Goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda in countries of origin. The emigration of
large numbers of medical personnel, for instance, can
adversely affect the attainment of health-related targets
in countries where access to health care is limited and
the number of trained health-care professionals is
insufficient (target 3.c). More fundamentally, international migration alone cannot remove the structural
constraints and impediments to sustainable develop-
ment faced by many countries, particularly the least
developed countries (LDCs) (De Haas, 2012).
To maximize the benefits and minimize the negative impacts of migration, a multi-pronged approach
is needed. On the one hand, it is important to address
the adverse drivers and structural factors that hinder
people’s ability to fulfill their aspirations while
remaining in their own countries. Creating opportunities for sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic
growth and decent work by various means, including
through foreign direct investment and by investing in
human capital (for example, expanding the number
of scholarships available to developing countries as
called for in target 4.b) is critical. On the other hand,
the transformative power of migration can be expanded
by reducing the cost of remittances in line with SDG
target 10.c, by encouraging the productive investment
of remittances in local economies and by tapping into
the skills and resources of transnational communities
(Adepoju, 2011). Migrants often play a crucial role in the economies and
societies of host countries by providing critical skills
and labour. A striking illustration of the contributions of migrant workers to countries of destination
emerged during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19) pandemic. Without the work of millions of essential migrant workers, vital sectors of the economy in many
host countries would have faced severe labour shortages.
International migration can also have a positive impact
on the demographic outlook of receiving countries by
delaying or lessening the extent of population ageing
and by slowing or averting population decline. Such
impacts tend to be most significant in countries at
advanced stages of the demographic transition—when
both fertility and mortality have fallen substantially—
and where migrant inflows are substantial compared
to the size of the population (United Nations, 2021a). In
such countries, international migrants often comprise
a relatively large share of the total working-age population (figure 2). International migration can ease, at
least temporarily, fiscal pressures on public pension
and health-care systems in host countries with rapidly
ageing populations (Clements and others, 2018; Han,
2013; Marois and others, 2020).
However, a large influx of migrants, especially when
it occurs in an irregular manner, can have adverse
effects on host societies, straining resources and
raising concerns about security and social cohesion. Local communities can be negatively affected
by such inflows, which place an additional strain on
the provision of services, housing and infrastructure.
Globally, 68 per cent of Governments report that they
view irregular migration as a major concern, while
another 25 per cent see it as a minor concern (United
Nations, 2020b). By creating more opportunities for
legal migration, countries of destination can increase
the contribution of migration to development. This
requires regularly assessing labour market needs and
setting migration policies accordingly. Globally, over
84 per cent of Governments report having a national
policy or strategy for providing legal migration path-
ways, including for labour migrants, while 69 per cent
indicate that they regularly align migration policies
with actual and projected labour market needs (United
Nations, 2021b). When given a choice, most people prefer to live, work
and prosper in their own countries. When that is not
possible, however, international migration can offer a
pathway to escape from deprivation and vulnerability
and, in some cases, to fulfill aspirations for a better
life. Unfavourable political, economic, social and
environmental circumstances in countries of origin,
combined with unrealistic perceptions of the opportunities available abroad and a limited understanding
of the associated risks and dangers, can lead people to
migrate even when they do not have access to safe and
regular pathways. Under such circumstances, migrants are more vulnerable to exploitation and abuse. Since
2014, more than 4,000 fatalities have been recorded
annually along migratory routes worldwide, with many
more migrant deaths going unrecorded (IOM, 2022).
Around one in every six adults worldwide, equivalent to
roughly three times the number of international migrants
in 2020, have indicated in recent surveys that they would
like to move to another country permanently if they had
a chance to do so (Esipova, Pugliese and Ray, 2018). Some
of the highest proportions of people reporting a desire to
emigrate are found in low-income countries. However,
people from such countries often lack the resources,
training, skills and social networks to migrate in a safe,
orderly and regular manner. It is critical, therefore, to
create opportunities for people to migrate in a dignified
and orderly fashion in line with target 10.7, upholding
and protecting their human rights regardless of migration status. At the same time, Governments should seek
to ensure that people who wish to emigrate are aware
of the risks associated with irregular and unsafe move-
ments, including the risk of human trafficking (targets
5.2, 8.7, 16.2), and are informed about the immigration
requirements as well as labour market and living conditions in countries of destination. While international migrants are important agents of
change, they can also be extremely vulnerable owing to discrimination or other social and economic barriers
to their inclusion in host societies. Ensuring that no one
is left behind is one of the overarching principles of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, affirming
that the benefits of sustainable development must be
shared by all members of society, including the most
vulnerable.
Respecting, protecting and fulfilling the rights of all
migrants, irrespective of their migration status, support
their inclusion in host societies and enhance the development potential of migration (United Nations, 2020b).
At a minimum, host countries should ensure access to
basic services, including health care and education,
while addressing discrimination and promoting migrant
integration (De Haas, 2012). Globally, 78 per cent of
countries report having policies to promote migrant
integration (United Nations, 2021b).
Policies to address the vulnerability of migrant workers,
end unfair labour practices, promote fair and ethical
recruitment, facilitate the portability of social security
benefits and recognize qualifications acquired abroad
can also advance the beneficial impacts of migration and
reduce its costs (targets 8.8). The inclusion of migrants
in policymaking and development planning, as well as
measures to ensure that migration policies are gender-
responsive and child-sensitive, are essential to fulfilling
the 2030 Agenda’s pledge that no one will be left behind.
Increasing the availability of high-quality, timely and
reliable data disaggregated by migratory status in line
with target 17.18 is also critical in this regard.